Visual Data Interpreter System 
Overview
The Visual Data Interpreter System is a comprehensive application designed to enhance and analyze images in conjunction with related PDF documents. By integrating advanced image processing techniques with natural language processing models, the system provides detailed, context-aware descriptions of images, leveraging information extracted from accompanying documents.  Features Image Enhancement: Improves image quality using techniques such as histogram equalization and sharpness enhancement. Optical Character Recognition (OCR): Extracts text from images to incorporate textual information into the analysis. PDF Text Extraction: Retrieves and processes text from uploaded PDF documents to provide contextual information. Image Feature Extraction: Utilizes pre-trained deep learning models to extract meaningful features from images. Embeddings Generation: Converts both image features and textual data into embeddings using models like nomic-embed-text. Contextual Retrieval: Employs FAISS vector stores to retrieve relevant document content based on image features. Natural Language Understanding: Generates detailed descriptions of images using advanced language models such as qwen2.5.
Technologies Used
Programming Languages: Python
Libraries:
torch
pytesseract
pdfplumber
streamlit
Pillow
FAISS
Deep Learning Models:
ResNet50 for image feature extraction
nomic-embed-text for embeddings generation
qwen2.5 for natural language understanding

Architecture

Setup Instructions
Clone the Repository:

git clone https://github.com/anusha9573/visual-data-interpreter.git
cd visual-data-interpreter
Install Dependencies:

Ensure you have Python installed. Then, install the required packages:

]
pip install -r requirements.txt
Run the Application:

Launch the Streamlit application:

streamlit run app.py
Usage:

Access the application through the provided URL.
Upload an image and its corresponding PDF document.
Enter any specific questions related to the uploaded files.
View the generated, context-aware description of the image.

Contributing
We welcome contributions to enhance the functionality and performance of this system. Please follow these steps:

Fork the repository.
Create a new branch: git checkout -b feature-name.
Commit your changes: git commit -m 'Add new feature'.
Push to the branch: git push origin feature-name.
Submit a pull request detailing your changes.
